Announcer: THIS IS
AN ABC NEWS SPECIAL.
AND MARRIAGE.
WHY WE STAY AND WHY WE STRAY.
NOW FROM NEW YORK, JOHN STOSSEL.
GOOD EVENING.
HOW DO YOU FIND LOVE?
AND THEN HOW DO YOU KEEP
FROM LOSING IT?
THE PEOPLE WHO REPORT
THE GREATEST SATISFACTION
WITH LIFE ARE COUPLES -- PEOPLE
WHO ARE IN LONG-TERM
RELATIONSHIPS.
NOT ALL OF THEM, OF COURSE,
BUT ON AVERAGE, COUPLES ARE
HEALTHIER AND SAY THEY'RE
HAPPIER.
THAT'S THE GOOD NEWS.
GETTING THERE IS ANOTHER MATTER.
MANY OF US KEEP MESSING THAT UP.
POETS AND PHILOSOPHERS USED
TO BE THE EXPERTS ON THIS.
NOW SCIENTISTS SAY THEY HAVE
SOME ANSWERS.
AND THEY SAY THE MATING GAME
BEGINS EARLIER THAN YOU THINK.
**
Reporter: DOES THIS LOOK
FAMILIAR?
PAINFUL?
WHEN I HADO ATTEND THESE
AWKWARD GRADE SCHOOL DANCES,
THE LAST THING I WOULD ADMIT WAS
THAT I LIKED SOMEONE.
YET I DID.
CRUSHES START AT THIS AGE.
AND NOW RESEARCHERS SAY KIDS
THIS AGE ARE ALREADY FOCUSING
ON THE KIND OF PERSON THEY'LL
LATER MARRY.
THEY BELIEVE THE BLUEPRINT
PROBABLY GELS BETWEEN THE AGES
OF 3 AND 8.
ANTHROPOLOGIST HELEN FISHER --
AS A SMALL CHILD, YOU GROW UP
GETTING USED TO YOUR FATHER'S
SENSE OF HUMOR, THE AMOUNT
OF CHAOS AROUND THE HOUSE,
THE MUSIC THAT IS PLAYED.
AND YOU BEGIN TO BUILD
AN UNCONSCIOUS LIST OF THINGS
THAT YOU ARE LOOKING
FOR IN A MATE.
Reporter: MAYBE IT'S THE WAY
YOUR FATHER HELD YOU.
THE WAY YOUR MOTHER'S HAIR
TOUCHED YOUR FACE.
IT'S THESE SNIPPETS OF MEMORY
THAT ARE IMPRINTED -- MOMENTS
THAT MADE US FEEL WARM
AND CONTENTED.
OR ANGRY AND UNHAPPY.
THE MEMORIES FORM OUR LOVE MAP,
AND WE FOLLOW THAT MAP,
FOR BETTER OR WORSE, THROUGHOUT
OUR LIVES.
THE KIDS ARE AWARE
OF THEIR PREFERENCES.
WHAT WOULD YOU LIKE YOUR HUSBAND
TO BE LIKE?
SMART.
Reporter: SMART?
HANDSOME.
THE PERFECT NOSE.
[ GIGGLING ]
THE PERFECT HEAD.
NO BIG HEADS.
SHE HAS TO HAVE GOOD TEETH.
[ LAUGHTER ]
AND SHE GOTTA WEAR NICE SHOES.
I DON'T CARE IF THEY'RE
HANDSOME OR NOT, BUT THEY HAVE
TO BE FUNNY, BECAUSE YOU KNOW
THOSE BORING GUYS ARE BORING.
Reporter: DO SUCH CHILDHOOD
WISHES REALLY GOVERN OUR CHOICES
YEARS LATER?
THE ANTHROPOLOGISTS SAY YES.
SO WHEN PEOPLE GO OUT, THEY'RE
LOOKING FOR SOMEONE WHO FITS
THEIR MAP?
MM-HMM.
WELL, THEY DON'T THINK THEY ARE,
BUT THEY WALK INTO A BAR,
AND THEY LOOK AT FOUR PEOPLE,
AND THEY SAY, "THOSE WON'T DO,
BUT, BOY, HE'S CUTE."
AND SO ALREADY, A CERTAIN SIZE,
A CERTAIN SHAPE, A CERTAIN
HAIRSTYLE, A CERTAIN WAY
THE BODY IS HANDLED HAS SENT
MESSAGES TO YOU.
AND YOU RESPOND TO THEM.
ARE YOU READY?
YOU ROLLING?
Reporter: SOMETIMES AGAIN
AND AGAIN, EVEN IF THAT PERSON
MAY NOT BE RIGHT FOR YOU.
NOTICE HOW SOME PEOPLE'S EXES
LOOK ALIKE?
YOU KEEP LOOKING FOR THAT ONE
WHO FEELS LIKE A PERFECT FIT.
THE PERFECT ONE WOULD BE LIKE
WHEN YOU LOOK AT HER, EVERYONE
ELSE IN THE ROOM DISAPPEARS,
THEY PLAN TO MARRY.
THEY'VE AGREED TO LET
OUR CAMERAS TAG ALON JUST ATTRACTED
TO HER ON SO MANY DIFFERENT
LEVELS.
A SOFTNESS.
THAT'S WHAT I THINK FIRST
ABOUT JOY IS SHE'S SO SOFT,
AND SHE'S SO WARM AND JUST
VERY -- VERY VOLUPTUOUS TO ME.
Reporter: JEFF SPEAR
AND JOY DIAMOND OF ATLANTA SAY
THEY'RE IN LOVE.
THEY JUST GOT ENGAGED.
FIVE WEEKS FROM THIS DAY,
THEY PLAN TO MARRY.
THEY'VE AGREED TO LET
OUR CAMERAS TAG ALONG, AND WE'LL
KEEP CHECKING IN WITH THEM
TO COMPARE THEIR EXPERIENCES
TO WHAT THE EXPERTS KNOW
ABOUT LOVE.
STARTING WITH HOW WE CHOOSE
OUR PARTNER.
IT WAS SOMETHING.
I'M NOT -- I CAN'T EXACTLY
PINPOINT EXACTLY, BUT I CAN TELL
YOU THAT I COULDN'T WAIT TO GO
OUT WITH HIM AGAIN.
I SAW HER STANDING ACROSS
THE ROOM, AND I LOOKED
AT MY BROTHER, AND I SAID, "I
THINK I NEED TO GO OVER THERE
AND SAY HELLO."
Reporter: WHAT BROUGHT HIM
ACROSS THE ROOM?
* WONDERFUL -- *
Reporter: LOVE USUALLY BEGINS
WITH THAT ANIMAL-LIKE FEELING
WE CALL LUST.
SMELL PLAYS A BIG PART
WITH ANIMALS, BUT IT'S MORE
COMPLEX THAN THAT.
OFTEN WHAT TURNS THE FEMALES
ON --
THE MALES' LOOKS.
IN THE ANIMAL KINGDOM, IT'S
THE MALES THAT HAVE EVOLVED
BRIGHTER COLORS AND MORE ELEGANT
OUTFITS.
AND THESE DO ATTRACT THE LADIES.
EVEN FAKE ORNAMENTATION WORKS.
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA,
AT IRVINE, ZOOLOGIST
NANCY BERLEY USES ELMER'S GLUE
TO GIVE SOME MALE FINCHES
ARTIFICIAL CRESTS.
THE FEMALE FINCHES THEN PREFER
TO MATE WITH THOSE BIRDS.
WHY WOULD ORNAMENTATION MAKE
SUCH A DIFFERENCE?
PEOPLE ARE OBSESSED
WITH LOOKS, BECAUSE LOOKS HAVE
MARKED HEALTH OF OTHERS.
Reporter: AND GOOD LOOKS
USUALLY REQUIRE SYMMETRY, SAYS
BIOLOGIST RANDY THORNHILL.
NEUTRAL EXPRESSION
FOR THE CAMERA, PLEASE.
Reporter: AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF NEW MEXICO, THORNHILL
MEASURES PEOPLE'S SYMMETRY.
GOOD.
Reporter: HOW BALANCED
THEIR BODIES ARE.
HE STARTED THIS RESEARCH AFTER
DISCOVERING THAT INSECTS
WITH GOOD SYMMETRY ATTRACT MORE
MATES.
DOES IT WORK FOR PEOPLE, TOO?
THORNHILL'S COMPUTER DRAWS LINES
THROUGH THE FACE THAT MEASURE
SYMMETRY.
FACES WITH THE HIGHEST SYMMETRY
HAVE LOW NUMBERS.
SURE ENOUGH, MOST PEOPLE JUDGE
THOSE FACES AS MORE ATTRACTIVE.
YEP, HE WAS RATED AS ONE
OF THE MOST ATTRACTIVE.
THORNHILL HAS RUN THESE TESTS
IN OTHER COUNTRIES WITH OTHER
CULTURES.
EVERYWHERE, PEOPLE REGARD
SYMMETRY AS MORE ATTRACTIVE.
AND ON QUESTIONNAIRES,
THE SYMMETRICAL MEN REPORT
HAVING MORE SEX.
MORE SEX PARTNERS
IN A LIFETIME.
THEY BEGIN SEX AT AN EARLIER
AGE.
THEY ENGAGE IN MORE INFIDELITY
IN THEIR RELATIONSHIPS.
Reporter: IT'S NOT SURPRISING
THAT GOOD-LOOKING PEOPLE HAVE
MORE OPPORTUNITIES FOR SEX,
BUT WHAT IS IMPORTANT IS THAT
SCIENTISTS SAY IT RELATES
TO SURVIVAL OF THE SPECIES.
WE HAVE AN INSTINCT DEEP
IN THE PRIMITIVE PART
OF OUR BRAINS, A REPTILIAN
BRAIN, THEY CALL IT, THAT TELLS
US TO TRY HARD TO MAKE SURE
OUR GENES CARRY ON.
THE BEST WAY TO DO THAT IS
TO PICK HEALTHY MATES AND,
APPARENTLY, GOOD LOOKS --
CLEAR SKIN, BRIGHT EYES, OFTEN
PREDICT GOOD GENES.
SO DOES BEING ABLE TO JUMP HIGH.
IT'S A MASAI COURTING RITUAL
Reporter: WHEN WE'RE OLDER,
THE SIGNALS ARE SIMILAR BUT MORE
SOPHISTICATED.
WHEN YOU WALK INTO A SINGLES
BAR, THE FIRST THING THAT BOTH
MEN AND WOMEN DO IS SET UP
A TERRITORY.
THEN THEY BEGIN THE MOVE
IN THEIR SPACE TO ATTRACT
ATTENTION TO THEMSELVES --
A VERY LOUD LAUGH.
GESTURING TO PEOPLE AROUND
THE BAR.
THE MOVING OF THE HAIR.
ANYTHING TO DRAW ATTENTION
TO YOURSELF.
Reporter: SCIENTISTS ACTUALLY
STUDY THIS BEHAVIOR, RECORDING
GESTURES THEY LABEL
"GROOMING TALK" AND
THE "COPULATORY GAZE."
PSYCHOLOGIST DAVID BUSS --
HERE WE SEE A WOMAN DO WHAT'S
CALLED NECK CANTING.
THIS GESTURE LIKE THAT IS
A SEXUAL SIGNAL.
TOUCHING THE HAIR IS ALSO
A FLIRTATION SIGNAL.
Reporter: THERE ARE DOZENS
OF THESE SIGNALS.
IT CAN BE AS SIMPLE AND SUBTLE
AS DOING THIS TO THE EDGE
OF A GSS.
ON THE OTHER HAND, THERE ARE
"NO THANK YOU" SIGNALS, TOO.
THE WOMAN HAS A CLOSED ARM
GESTURE, AGAIN INDICATING SHE'S
NOT RECEPTIVE TO THE GUY.
SO THE PICKUP RUNS
ON MESSAGES, AND THEY HAVE TO BE
RETURNED.
THEY EVOLVED BECAUSE THOSE
INDIVIDUALS THAT HAD THEM LIVED
ON, HAD MORE CHILDREN AND SPREAD
THE BRAIN PHYSIOLOGY TO THE NEXT
GENERATION.
Reporter: WE'RE NOT
CONSCIOUSLY THINKING
ABOUT HAVING HEALTHY CHILDREN?
NO.
Reporter: WHEN WE'RE
IN THE BAR?
THERE'S VERY LITTLE THAT GOES
ON IN THE CONSCIOUS BRAIN WHEN
IT COMES TO LOVE, BUT DON'T
FORGET THAT THE MATING GAME IS
THE MOST IMPORTANT GAME THAT
WE PLAY.
IF YOU HAVE FOUR CHILDREN,
AND I HAVE NO CHILDREN, YOU LIVE
ON, AND I DIE OUT.
SO THE GAME OF LOVE MATTERS.
Reporter: AND THE GAME IS
DIFFERENT FOR MEN AND WOMEN,
BECAUSE IF THE GOAL IS PASSING
ON OUR GENES, THE DIFFERENT
SEXES HAD TO EVOLVE DIFFERENT
STRATEGIES.
FOR A MAN TO PASS ON HIS GENES,
THE BEST THING HE CAN DO IS
FATHER AS MANY CHILDREN
AS HE CAN.
TO DO THAT, HE HAS TO TRY
TO HAVE SEX WITH AS MANY WOMEN
AS WILL LET HIM.
* BRING IT ON -- *
Reporter: MALE ANIMALS OFTEN
FIGHT FOR THE RIGHT
TO IMPREGNATE THE WHOLE HERD.
BUT FEMALES MAKE CHOICES, TOO.
BECAUSE THEY NEED HELP RAISING
A CHILD.
BILLIONS OF YEARS AGO
ON THE GRASSLANDS OF AFRICA, IT
WAS AN ADAPTIVE THING
FOR A FEMALE TO FIND A MALE WHO
WAS WILLING TO SHARE HIS GOODS
AND WEALTH.
Reporter: AND TODAY STILL,
WOMEN ARE MORE LIKELY TO ALSO
LOOK FOR RESOURCES.
AFTER ALL, MOTHERHOOD'S
EXPENSIVE.
BUT SPERM IS CHEAP.
THAT'S EVOLUTION SPEAKING.
OF COURSE, TODAY WE CALL IT
ROMANCE AND LOVE.
WHEN YOU OPEN A MAGAZINE
AND SUDDENLY GET A RUSH
OF SEXUAL CRAVING, THAT'S A VERY
DIFFERENT FEELING FROM FALLING
IN LOVE WITH SOMEBODY
AND WANTING TO TALK TO THEM
ON THE TELEPHONE.
AND I THINK THAT THERE IS
A DIFFERENT BRAIN SYSTEM
OPERATING.
Reporter: THAT SECOND STAGE
IS CALLED INFATUATION.
AND HERE'S WHERE WE PART
FROM THE ANIMAL.
YOU JUST FOCUS ON THIS
PERSON.
SOME PEOPLE WILL SAY THAT
THEY THINK OF THEIR TRUE LOVE
AS MUCH AS 85% OF THEIR WAKING
HOURS.
THE PERSON KEEPS ON POPPING
INTO YOUR BRAIN.
IT'S CALLED INTRUSIVE
THINKING -- YOU CAN'T GET THEM
OUT OF YOUR MIND.
THE FIRST TIME I TOLD JOY
"I LOVE YOU" WAS A STRICTLY
INVOLUNTARY RESPONSE.
I MEAN, JOY MENTIONED SOMETHING
THAT SHE LOVED CHOCOLATE
OR SOMETHING, AND I JUST WENT,
"WELL, I LOVE YOU."
I SORT OF GOT A CHILL.
I REMEMBER MY SPINE KIND
OF TINGLING LIKE, "YEAH, THAT
SOUNDED GREAT COMING OUT
OF MY MOUTH."
Reporter: SOON AFTER, JEFF
BROUGHT THIS RING AND PROPOSED.
AND NOW, SIX MONTHS LATER,
THE WEDDING CEREMONY IS MOMENTS
AWAY.
JEFF AND JOY ARE ABOUT TO START
THEIR LIVES AS HUSBAND AND WIFE.
WE WISH THEM WELL.
STILL, FOR THEM AND FOR ANY
COUPLE, THERE IS WITHIN US
AN ANCIENT CONFLICT.
THE BRAIN IS A POOR DESIGN,
ACTUALLY.
WE'RE NOT A WELL-BUILT ANIMAL.
WE HAVE EVOLVED THE BRAIN
PHYSIOLOGY TO ATTACH TO ONE
PARTNER AND RAISE OUR CHILDREN
AS A TEAM.
AND I THINK WE'VE ALSO EVOLVED
THE BRAIN PHYSIOLOGY TO HAVE
A ROVING EYE.
SO WE SEEM TO HAVE BOTH.
LEAVING THE HUMAN ANIMAL --
WE ARE IN .
SO WE'RE TORN.
WE'RE PROGRAMMED TO BOND TO ONE
PERSON AND TO SPREAD OUR SEED.
THE RESULT IS THAT LOTS
OF PEOPLE BOND TO ONE PERSON,
PLEDGE EVERLASTING LOVE AND THEN
CHEAT.
I BETRAYED MY WIFE.
AND I EMBARRASSED THE PRESIDENT.
KENNEDY WENT ON TO PUBLICLY
APOLOGIZE TO THE FAMILY
OF THE TEENAGE BABY-SITTER --
THERE WERE FURTHER QUESTIONS
TODAY ABOUT WHETHER
JOSEPH RALSTON'S EXTRAMARITAL
AFFAIR --
FORGIVE ME.
Reporter: OF COURSE, THERE'S
NOTHING NEW ABOUT ALL THIS.
LIFELONG MONOGAMY IS
EXTREMELY RARE STATISTICALLY.
PERHAPS 25% OF THE PEOPLE PURSUE
THAT.
I'VE BEEN THROUGH A LOT
OF PUBLIC HUMILIATION.
Reporter: NOW, YOU'D THINK
THE FALLOUT FROM INFIDELITY,
OR EVEN JUST THE RISK OF BEING
CAUGHT AND EXPOSED, ESPECIALLY
FOR FAMOUS PEOPLE, WOULD DETER
THEM, BUT IT DOESN'T SEEM TO.
WE'RE TOLD EVEN OUR LEADERS
CAN'T RESIST.
PEOPLE TAKE ENORMOUS RISKS
TO CHEAT?
YEAH.
YOU CAN LOSE NOT ONLY YOUR JOB
AND YOUR FAMILY AND YOUR HOME
AND YOUR MONEY AND YOUR PRIDE
AND YOUR SELF-RESPECT,
BUT YOUR HEALTH.
I MEAN, WE LIVE IN A SOCIETY
WHERE YOU CAN GET AIDS AND DIE.
Reporter: THERE WERE TIMES
WHEN THERE WERE HORRIBLE
PUNISHMENTS.
ABSOLUTELY.
Reporter: YOU COULD GET
YOUR HEAD CHOPPED OFF.
BURNED YOU ALIVE.
AND PEOPLE STILL CHEAT.
THAT IS THE TRIUMPH OF NATURE
OVER CULTURE --
THE FACT THAT THE HUMAN ANIMAL
WILL CONTINUE TO DO THINGS THAT
THEY ALL THEIR LIVES HAVE KNOWN
ARE NOT CORRECT.
Reporter: AND THERE ARE
GENDER DIFFERENCES WITH THIS.
AS WE SAID, FOR 1 MILLION YEARS,
NATURE TAUGHT THAT A WOMAN'S
GENES ARE BEST SERVED BY FINDING
ONE MAN WHO WILL COMMIT TO HER,
WHILE MEN'S GENES LIVE
ON BY HAVING SEX WITH LOTS
OF WOMEN.
SO IT'S NOT SURPRISING THAT THEN
AND NOW, MEN ARE MORE LIKELY
TO CHEAT --
BY TWO TO ONE, ACCORDING TO MOST
SURVEYS.
OUR APPETITES ARE DIFFERENT.
YOU ALSO SEE THE DIFFERENCE
IN OUR CHOICE OF READING
MATERIAL.
FAR MORE WOMEN BUY ROMANCE
NOVELS, WHERE THE LEADING
CHARACTER USUALLY HAS AN INTENSE
RELATIONSHIP WITH ONE SPECIAL
MAN.
MEN BUY SKIN MAGAZINES, WHICH
LET MEN LOOK AT LOTS
OF DIFFERENT WOMEN.
IT'S AS IF MEN ARE PROGRAMMED
TO KEEP SEEKING NEW PARTNERS.
MEN TEND, FOR EXAMPLE,
TO HAVE TWICE AS MANY SEXUAL
FANTASIES AS WOMEN PER DAY.
ALSO, DURING THE COURSE
OF A SINGLE FAMILY EPISODE, MEN
ARE MORE LIKELY TO DO WHAT'S
CALLED "PARTNER SWITCHING"
SO ONE PARTNER WILL COME IN,
AND THEN HE'LL SWITCH TO ANOTHER
PARTNER AND ANOTHER.
Reporter: AND WITH ALL
THE CHEATING IN OUR MINDS, SOME
SCIENTISTS SAY IT'S SURPRISING
HOW FEW OF US CHEAT IN REAL
LIFE, GIVEN WHAT ANIMALS DO.
IT'S THE NORM FOR MOST ANIMALS
TO JUST COPULATE AND MOVE
ONTO ANOTHER PARTNER.
ONLY 3% OF MAMMALS STAY WITH ONE
PARTNER FOR LIFE.
BEAVERS, CERTAIN KINDS
OF ANTELOPE DO, AND SOMETIMES --
WE DO.
IT MAY BE THAT CHEMICALS
IN THE BRAIN DICTATE THESE
ATTACHMENTS.
THE SPECIES OF FIELD MICE CALLED
PRAIRIE VOLS ALSO CHOOSES
A PARTNER AND STAYS.
DID THIS GO UP?
IS THAT WHAT HAPPENED?
Reporter: RESEARCHERS HERE
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND
FOUND IT'S A CHEMICAL CALLED
OXYTOCIN, WHICH IS IN THE BRAIN
OF ALL ANIMALS THAT CAUSES VOLS,
LIKE THIS COUPLE WEARING
THE GREEN COLLARS, TO STAY
PAIRED UP.
BECAUSE WHEN THE RESEARCHERS
BLOCK THAT CHEMICAL, VOLS STOP
PREFERRING THE SINGLE PARTNER.
YOU SEE OUR VOL WITH THE GREEN
COLLAR HERE MAKING A MOVE ON ONE
WITH A RED COLLAR -- NOT
ITS MATE.
RESEARCHERS SPECULATE THAT
THE SAME CHEMICAL WHICH IS
PRESENT IN HUMANS DICTATES
OUR DRIVE TO STAY OR STRAY.
IF IT IS A MATTER OF BRAIN
CHEMISTRY, SOME RESEARCHERS
SUGGEST THAT THE TENDENCY
TO CHEAT COULD BE PASSED ON,
WHICH MAY EXPLAIN WHY RANDOMNESS
WHAT HAPPENED?UGH SEVERAL
Reporter: HELEN FISHER THINKS
THE ITCH COMES EARLIER.
AFTER LOOKING AT DATA
FROM 62 DIFFERENT COUNTRIES,
SHE FOUND MORE PEOPLE DIVORCE
AROUND THE FOURTH YEAR
OF MARRIAGE.
MILLIONS OF YEARS AGO,
WE EVOLVED THE DRIVE TO PAIR UP
AND REAR OUR CHILDREN AND STAY
TOGETHER AT LEAST LONG ENOUGH
TO REAR A SINGLE CHILD
THROUGH INFANCY, ABOUT FOUR
YEARS.
Reporter: SO MAYBE THERE'S
A FOUR-YEAR ITCH.
MAYBE THE TIME KEEPS GETTING
SHORTER BECAUSE THERE'S JUST
SO MUCH TEMPTATION AROUND THESE
DAYS.
IN ANCESTRAL ENVIRONMENTS
WE EVOLVED IN THE CONTEXT
OF SMALL GROUPS.
PERHAPS 50, PERHAPS AS MANY
200 INDIVIDUALS IN OUR LIFETIME,
SO WE WOULD NEVER BE EXPOSED
TO AS MANY ATTRACTIVE IMAGES
AS WE ARE EXPOSED TO ALMOST
DAILY IN MODERN ENVIRONMENTS.
**
Reporter: TODAY WE'RE FLOODED
WITH IMAGES OF SO MANY GREAT
LOOKING PEOPLE WHO LOOK
SO WILLING AND READY.
* FEVER *
IN ESSENCE THESE ATTRACTIVE
IMAGES TRICK OUR PSYCHOLOGICAL
MECHANISMS INTO BELIEVING THAT
THERE ARE LOTS AND LOTS
OF DESIRABLE PARTNERS OUT THERE
AND SO IT'S VERY DESTRUCTIVE
TO RELATIONSHIPS.
Reporter: DAVID BUSS SAYS MEN
SOMETIMES FIND THAT KNOWING THAT
IS REASSURING.
THEY GET ATTRACTED TO ANOTHER
WOMAN AND WHAT THEY SAY IS, "AH,
THAT'S MY EVOLVED DESIRE
FOR SEXUAL VARIETY.
IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT I DON'T
LOVE MY WIFE.
I'M GOING TO CHOOSE NOT TO ACT
ON THAT DESIRE."
THAT'S WHEN YOU BEGIN TO BE
A GROWN-UP.
THAT'S WHEN YOU BEGIN TO DECIDE,
"NO, I'M NOT GOING TO FLIRT
WITH THAT PERSON IN THE OFFICE.
I LIKE MY FAMILY.
CONTINUES.
OUR CULTURE SEEMS INFATUATED
WITH LUST, SEDUCTION, SEXUAL
VARIETY.
YET, PEOPLE KEEP GETTING
MARRIED, MAKING THAT COMMITMENT.
WHAT'S THAT ABOUT?
**
[ PLAYING BRIDAL MARCH ]
EVERY YEAR SOME 3 MILLION
AMERICAN COUPLES, REASONABLY
CONFIDENT THAT THE CHEMISTRY
THEY FEEL NOW WILL LAST
A LIFETIME, PROPOSE TO EACH
OTHER, PROMISING TO STAY
TOGETHER FOREVER.
FOREVER, FOREVER, FOREVER.
AMEN.
Reporter: THERE ARE ALL KINDS
OF CEREMONIES.
I PROMISE TO BE TRUE
TO YOU IN GOOD TIMES AND IN BAD.
I WILL LOVE YOU ALL THE DAYS
OF MY LIFE.
WITH THIS RING.
Reporter: THIS SUMMER, JEFF
AND JOY GOT MARRIED AS PLANNED.
JEFFREY, DO YOU TAKE JOY
TO BE YOUR WIFE.
IF SO, ANSWER YES.
YES.
**
Reporter: MOST COUPLES TIE
THE KNOT IN RELIGIOUS
CEREMONIES, ACCOMPANIED
BY AMERICAN TRADITIONS LIKE LOTS
OF WHITE LACE AND CHAMPAGNE.
**
YOU MAY NOW KISS THE BRIDE.
Reporter: OTHERS MARRY
IN SIMPLER SETTINGS.
[ CHEERS ]
THERE ARE WEDDINGS AT WHICH
THERE WON'T BE ANY BRIDES.
OR ANY GROOMS.
YOU MAY KISS THE BRIDE.
**
Reporter: OR ANY CHAPELS.
THIS COUPLE FELT THEY SHOULD GET
MARRIED IN THEIR CAR.
LOTS OF PEOPLE SEEM TO NEED
TO MARRY IN ODD PLACES.
* LOVE AND MARRIAGE *
Reporter: PLACES THAT HAVE
SPECIAL MEANING TO THEM.
* GOES TOGETHER LIKE A HORSE
AND CARRIAGE *
* THIS I TELL YOU BROTHER *
Reporter: BUT HOWEVER PEOPLE
MARRY, TURNS OUT THAT HAVING
A CEREMONY IS ONE OF THE MOST
UNIVERSAL OF RITUALS.
[ CHEERS ]
THEY MARK THE END OF COURTSHIP
AND THE ONSET OF FAMILY LIFE.
[ DRUM BEATS ]
AND FOR THOUSANDS OF YEARS,
IN MOST EVERY CULTURE, PEOPLE
HAVE WANTED CEREMONY.
IT TURNS TO ACTUALLY BE
HIGHLY USEFUL FOR ALL SOCIETIES.
Reporter: USEFUL, SAYS
ANTHROPOLOGIST, DAVID MURRAY,
BECAUSE IT MARKS THE SPOT WHERE
A COUPLE'S DESIRE
AND THE INTEREST OF SOCIETY
CONVERGE.
AND EVERYWHERE YOU FIND
HUMAN BEINGS, THERE WILL BE
RULES AND REGULATIONS ABOUT WHEN
YOU CAN MATE, WITH WHOM, WHO'S
PROHIBITED, WHO'S PREFERRED.
Reporter: IN EVERY CULTURE?
EVERY CULTURE.
UNLIKE ANIMALS HUMANS DON'T MATE
WITH JUST ANYBODY, WE HAVE
RULES.
THERE ARE APPROPRIATE TIMES
AND PLACES.
THAT IS A KIND OF HUMAN
CHARACTERISTIC, IS TO TAKE
OUR APPETITES AND NOT JUST
EXPRESS THEM AS ANIMALS WOULD,
BUT REGULATE THEM, FORMALIZE
THEM --
IF WE LOSE THE KING'S --
THE ZULU USED TO SAY THIS,
"THEY ARE OUR ENEMIES, THEREFORE
WE MARRY THEM."
Reporter: EVEN ROYALTY
COULDN'T MARRY FOR LOVE.
THEY HAD TO BUILD ALLIANCES.
YOU TOOK THE PRINCE FROM HERE
AND PRINCESS FROM THERE
AND SPAIN WAS SUDDENLY UNITED
WITH AN ALLIANCE WITH FRANCE.
Reporter: AND ORDINARY PEOPLE
WERE RESTRICTED BY INCEST TABOOS
AND KINDS OF CULTURAL PRESSURE
ABOUT WHEN AND WHOM THEY COULD
MARRY.
MUCH OF MARRIAGE WAS
ABOUT PROVIDING FOR THE FUTURE.
THE POINT IS TO BRING THEM
TOGETHER, HAVE SEX, BE HAPPY,
HAVE A BABY AND THE BABY IS
CONNECTED SUDDENLY.
WE CALL THAT SOCIAL CAPITAL.
Reporter: SOCIAL CAPITAL,
SAYS MURRAY, MEANS THE CHILD IS
NOW PROTECTED BY AN EXTENDED
FAMILY.
THE CHILD SUDDENLY HAS TWO
SETS OF KINSMEN, THE MOTHER'S
SIDE AND FATHER'S SIDE.
COME ON, DARLING.
COME ON.
THAT CHILD NOW MAKES A CLAIM
UPON BOTH THESE GROUPS.
THEY HAVE A STAKE IN THAT CHILD.
THEY HAVE A STAKE
IN THE DURABILITY OF THAT
MARRIAGE.
YOU'VE GOT TO BE CAREFUL.
Reporter: BUT WHAT
ABOUT LOVE?
WE LIKE TO THINK THAT MARRIAGE
IS BUILT ON THAT.
BUT MURRAY ARGUES THAT THAT
POINTS AN REALISTIC BURDEN
ON MARRIAGE.
BECAUSE TODAY HUSBAND
AND WIFE PROBABLY ARE BOTH GOING
TO BE WORKING.
YOU WANT A PARTNER WHO IS
EXACTLY AN EQUAL TO YOU, SAME
EDUCATION.
SHE'S ALSO GOT TO BE
YOUR DEEPEST EMOTIONAL ALLY,
AN INTELLECTUAL COUNTERPART
FOR DISCUSSION.
AND SHE'S GOT TO DO THE TAXES
THAT NIGHT AND YOU'VE GOT TO DO
THE LAWN.
THAT'S AN ENORMOUS SET
OF UNDERTAKINGS THAT ALL OCCUR
ON THIS ONE LITTLE THIN
RELATIONSHIP AND THEN ALONG COME
THE KIDS, AND YOU'RE SLEEPLESS.
Reporter: IT'S ASKING TOO
MUCH?
I'M NOT SURE THAT IS A WEIGHT
IT CAN BEAR.
Reporter: AS EVIDENCE,
HE SAYS LOOK AT TODAY'S WESTERN
DIVORCE RATE.
WE ARE STARTING TO SEE THAT
THIS SYSTEM OF THE MARRIAGE IS
BEGINNING TO GET AWFULLY WEAK.
WE NEED TO RETHINK IT
FUNDAMENTALLY.
Reporter: RETHINK IT,
HIS SAYS, BY PUTTING LESS
EMPHASIS ON ROMANCE.
IF I WERE BUILDING
THE PERFECT SOCIETY, I WOULD
BUILD ONE WITH ARRANGED
MARRIAGES.
Reporter: ARRANGED MARRIAGES?
NOW, I'VE GROWN UP IN A CULTURE
WHERE WE FOLLOW OUR HEART,
OUR LOVE MAP, WHEN CHOOSING WHO
WE MARRY.
MOST OF US SHOP AROUND, DATE,
MAYBE LIVE WITH SOMEONE UNTIL
WE KNOW THEM WELL ENOUGH
TO PROPOSE.
STILL, NORMAL AS THAT SEEMS
TO ME, IN HALF THE COUNTRIES
OF THE WORLD, ARRANGED MARRIAGE
IS THE NORM, STILL.
AND EVEN IN AMERICA THEY HAPPEN
MORE OFTEN THAN YOU THINK.
LOVE AT FIRST SIGHT, I THINK
THAT'S MORE OF MYTH THAN
A REALITY.
Reporter: JESUL NAZWANI
BELIEVES MARRIAGE SHOULD BE
ARRANGED.
WHEN YOU SEE SOMEONE
AND YOU GET ALONG WITH THEM WELL
ENOUGH, AND YOU KNOW THAT
THEY COME FROM A GOOD FAMILY,
GOOD BACKGROUND AND WELL
EDUCATED -- AND THOSE ARE
THE THING YOU'RE LOOKING
FOR IN A WIFE.
Reporter: DOESN'T SOUND VERY
ROMANTIC.
IT TAKES THE ROMANCE OUT
OF IT.
Reporter: JESUL MARRIED
ISMITA NAZWANI THIS SPRING.
JESUL'S A CERAMIC ENGINEER,
WHO'S LIVED IN MONTVILLE,
NEW JERSEY MOST OF HIS LIFE.
HAD HE MARRIED IN HIS NATIVE
INDIA, HE WOULD HAVE RIDDEN
TO THE CEREMONY ON A WHITE
HORSE.
BUT SINCE HE'S NOW IN AMERICA,
HE FOUND A MORE WESTERN WAY
TO ARRIVE.
[ SITAR MUSIC ]
WHAT JESUL DIDN'T FIND, HOWEVER,
WAS ISMITA.
SHE WAS ESSENTIALLY CHOSEN
FOR HIM BY FAMILY MEMBERS.
100 YEARS AGO, THE COUPLE
WOULDN'T HAVE EVEN SEEN EACH
OTHER UNTIL THIS WHITE CLOTH WAS
DROPPED, DURING THE WEDDING.
[ APPLAUSE ]
JESUL AND ISMITA HAD AT LEAST
MET.
AFTER JUST THREE DATES,
THEY AGREED TO THE ENGAGEMENT.
MARRIAGE CAME SIX MONTHS LATER.
THE COUPLE HADN'T EVEN KNOWN
ABOUT EACH OTHER UNTIL THESE TWO
WOMEN, JESUL'S MOTHER
AND ISMITA'S AUNT, BROUGHT THEM
TOGETHER.
AFTER DECIDING THAT JESUL
AND ISMITA HAD QUALITIES THAT
WOULD MAKE FOR A SENSIBLE
MARRIAGE.
WE THOUGHT, YOU KNOW, IT'S
A GOOD MATCH FOR THE FAMILY
BECAUSE IT'S THE SAME
BACKGROUND, SAME EDUCATION
AND SIMILAR TYPE OF CULTURE
AND RELIGION WE HAVE.
Reporter: BUT WHAT
ABOUT LOVE?
WE BELIEVE IN LOVE AFTER
THE MARRIAGE, NOT LOVE BEFORE
THE MARRIAGE.
[ APPLAUSE ]
Reporter: JESUL AND ISMITA
HAD JUST RETURNED
FROM THEIR HONEYMOON, A WEEK
IN HAWAII, WHEN WE INTERVIEWED
THEM AND OTHERS WHO OFFERED
TO EXPLAIN ARRANGED MARRIAGE.
SO, HOW DOES THAT WORK?
YOUR PARENTS KNOW BETTER
AND THEN YOU FALL IN LOVE
WITH WHO THEY PICK?
IT'S NOT SO MUCH BETTER
FOR THEM TO GET INVOLVED,
BUT IT'S JUST -- IT'S ANOTHER
WAY OF MEETING PEOPLE.
WHEN YOU AGREE TO AN ARRANGED
MARRIAGE, YOU'RE AT A LEVEL
OF COMMITMENT THAT YOU'RE NOT
WHEN YOU'RE JUST DATING.
THAT IS PROBABLY AN ALIEN
IDEA FOR MANY AMERICANS,
THE NOTION OF DUTY
AND RESPONSIBILITY, BEING HOOKED
WITH OUR SEXUAL URGES.
BUT I THINK, IN FACT, THAT'S
MUCH MORE VIABLE IN THE LONG
RUN.
Reporter: HOW MISERABLE
FOR THE KIDS, FORCED TO MARRY?
I DON'T THINK SO.
THEY'VE BUILT A RELATIONSHIP
TO EACH OTHER AND I THINK THAT
THERE IS A LOVE THERE THAT MAY
BE AS PROFOUND AND AS DEEP,
THOUGH OF A DIFFERENT QUALITY
THAN THE ROMANTIC ENCHANTMENT
THAT WE FIND WHEN WE'RE 18.
Reporter: ALI HASSAN,
A PREMED STUDENT, NOW STUDYING
IN NEBRASKA, WAS TOLD
BY HIS PARENTS LAST YEAR, THEY'D
FOUND A BRIDE FOR HIM
IN PAKISTAN.
IF HE MARRIED HER, THEY SAID, IT
WOULD HELP END A FAMILY FEUD.
ALI DISCUSSED THIS
WITH HIS FRIENDS AT SCHOOL.
AND THEY, I UNDERSTAND, SAID
TO YOU, "ARE YOU NUTS?"
THEY WERE LIKE, "THIS IS
A VIOLATION OF YOUR BASIC HUMAN
RIGHTS."
THEY WERE GIVING ME ALL THESE
THINGS --
Reporter: HE FLEW TO PAKISTAN
AND MARRIED THIS 18-YEAR-OLD
GIRL, WITHOUT EVER MEETING
HER FIRST.
I SAW HER HALF AN HOUR AFTER
I WAS MARRIED.
Reporter: YOU GOT MARRIED
WITHOUT SEEING HER?
YES, BECAUSE YOU SEE,
THE CEREMONY WAS DONE IN A HOUSE
THAT WAS DIVIDED BY A WOMEN'S
SECTION OF THE HOUSE AND A MEN'S
SECTION OF THE HOUSE.
THEY MADE ME SIT DOWN.
THEY MADE ME SIT DOWN,
THEY INTRODUCED US, AND I LIKED
HER A LOT, ACTUALLY.
Reporter: WHAT -- WHAT DID
YOU LIKE?
SHE WAS GORGEOUS.
I MEAN, SHE WAS ALL I WANTED --
INNOCENT, VERY -- VERY, VERY,
VERY EASTERN.
AND THAT'S WHAT I WANTED.
Reporter: IN A FEW YEARS
SHE'LL JOIN HIM IN AMERICA.
IF I DO FIND THINGS THAT ARE
NOT GOOD ABOUT HER, I'M GOING
TO COMPROMISE.
I'M NOT GOING TO RUIN
HER LIFE --
Reporter: WHAT IF HE'S AWFUL?
[ LAUGHTER ]
WHAT IF SHE'S --
HOW CAN -- SHE'S ONLY 18.
HOW AWFUL CAN YOU GET AT 18?
[ LAUGHTER ]
Reporter: SHE COULD BE MEAN,
SELFISH --
I DON'T KNOW ABOUT THAT.
ONLY TIME WILL TELL WHEN I'M
WITH HER.
Reporter: MOST HERE WERE
SKEPTICAL OF AMERICAN DATING.
SINIANG IS SINGLE AND LIVES
NEW YORK.
AND YOU SAY THE PURPOSE IS
TO GET TO KNOW YOUR PARTNER,
BUT WE NEVER REALLY DO
BECAUSE IN THE DATING GAME
WE TRY TO PUT UP THE BEST
APPEARANCE THAT WE CAN.
YOU ARE TRYING TO IMPRESS
THE OTHER PERSON AND THAT'S NOT
WHO WE REALLY ARE.
SO, IT TAKES A WHOLE LIFETIME
TO GET TO KNOW YOUR PARTNER.
Reporter: WELL, HOW DO
YOUR PARENTS KNOW?
WE ARE THEIR KIDS
AND THEY KNOW TEMPERAMENT.
THEY KNOW WHAT'S BETTER FOR US.
Reporter: SIMA KUKU SAYS
HER AMERICAN FRIENDS AREN'T
FINDING GOOD HUSBANDS BY DATING.
BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT LOOKING
AT THINGS THAT REALLY MATTER
IN MARRIAGE.
Reporter: SIMA GREW UP
IN AMERICA AND AT AGE 27 GOT
TIRED OF DATING AND LET
HER IRANIAN PARENTS ARRANGE
FOR HER TO MARRY AN IRAQI MAN,
KELLY KUKU.
THEY DECIDED TO MARRY AFTER
DATING JUST THREE WEEKS.
WE LIKED EACH OTHER AND IT
JUST WORKED OUT THAT WE REALLY
DID FALL IN LOVE.
LOVE COMES.
YOU, YOU -- YOU HAVE TO TEND
TO IT.
LOVE JUST DOESN'T COME LIKE
THAT.
Reporter: WHAT'S WRONG
WITH THE AMERICAN WAY?
YOU'RE CAREFULLY, YOU DATE A LOT
OF PEOPLE.
YOU DON'T, YOU DON'T LOOK
FOR THE RIGHT THINGS
IN A PERSON.
IF IT'S SO GOOD THE AMERICAN WAY
HOW COME YOU HAVE SUCH A HIGH
DIVORCE RATE?
Reporter: SHE HAS A POINT.
THOUGH IT MAY BE THAT DIVORCE
RATES ARE LOWER IN OTHER
COUNTRIES BECAUSE DIVORCE THERE
IS SO UNACCEPTABLE, IF NOT
ILLEGAL.
WOULDN'T IT BE BETTER
IF WE COULD MARRY FOR LOVE
AND FIND BETTER WAYS TO MAKEN JOHN STOSS
WE BEGAN TONIGHT'S
PROGRAM LOOKING AT THE HEAT THAT
ERUPTS WHEN WE MEET THAT SPECIAL
PERSON.
THAT'S ALWAYS EXCITING AND OFTEN
EASY.
NOW THE TOUGH PART.
AFTER LUST AND INFATUATION FADE,
HOW DO YOU STAY IN LOVE?
**
THIS IS FOR US, MY DEAR.
Reporter: JEFF AND JOY NOW
BEGIN THEIR LIFE AS A MARRIED
COUPLE.
I LOVE YOU SO MUCH.
Reporter: WILL THEY LAST?
**
HOW DO COUPLES STAY TOGETHER?
HOW DO MARRIAGES MAKE IT
THROUGH BETTER AND WORSE?
I WAS TAKEN IN BY HER.
WE WANTED TO BE TOGETHER.
OKAY.
VERY GOOD.
HE SAID LET'S GET SPLICED.
LET'S GET SPLICED.
WHAT DO YOU THINK?
[ LAUGHTER ]
Reporter: THESE COUPLES SAY
THEY'RE HAPPILY MARRIED.
FRANK AND KAY SEVOLDY
FOR 56 YEARS.
PASSION THEY SAY IS WHAT BROUGHT
THEM TOGETHER, BUT IT'S NOT WHAT
KEPT THEM TOGETHER.
NO, OUR MARRIAGE WASN'T
ALWAYS FULL OF PASSION.
AND I DON'T THINK ANYONE SHOULD
EXPECT THAT.
NO MARRIAGE CAN BE FULL
OF PASSION ALL THE TIME.
THAT'S AN ILLUSION.
WE LIKE EACH OTHER
AND IF YOU WANT TO USE
THE MODERN WORD, WE LOVE EACH
OTHER.
WE HAVE PHYSICAL -- WE STILL
HAVE A PHYSICAL ATTRACTION
FOR EACH OTHER.
[ LAUGHTER ]
Reporter: BUT WHAT MAKES
THESE MARRIAGES WORK SAY
THE EXPERTS IS THE THIRD STAGE
OF LOVE, ATTACHMENT.
THIS IS THE STAGE THAT CAN LAST.
A GOOD MARRIAGE IS LIKE
AN ORIENTAL RUG WITH ALL KINDS
OF PATTERNS IN IT.
HERE'S ANOTHER ONE.
THAT THESE PEOPLE HAVE BUILT
TOGETHER, THAT DEEP SENSE
OF CALM AND SECURITY AND PEACE
THAT YOU HAVE WITH A LONG-TERM
PARTNER.
WHAT ELSE, DO YOU SEE,
ANYTHING?
Reporter: SUCH GOOD MARRIAGES
USUALLY REQUIRE FIGHTING
THROUGH TROUBLE.
RIGHT AFTER VIRGINIA LEWIS
MARRIED, 67 YEARS AGO, SHE HAD
SECOND THOUGHTS.
[ LAUGHTER ]
I LOOKED AT HIM
AND I THOUGHT, WHAT HAVE I DONE?
I DON'T EVEN KNOW THIS MAN.
WHAT HAVE I DONE?
I DON'T EVEN KNOW IF I KNOW WHAT
LOVE MEANS AT THIS MOMENT?
AND SO THE TEARS BEGAN TO FLOW.
THAT'S A --
YEAH, YEAH.
Reporter: VIRGINIA IS NOW 90.
BOB'S 94 AND THEIR MARRIAGE,
THEY SAY, IS GOOD.
WHEN WE RETIRE AT NIGHT,
WE GET IN BED LIKE A COUPLE
OF TEASPOONS, AND HE PUTS
HIS ARM AROUND ME
AND HE CHUCKLES AND SAYS, "THIS
IS -- THIS IS IT," YOU KNOW.
AND I FEEL THIS IS WONDERFUL.
* THE DREAM I KNOW
CAN NEVER BE *
Reporter: AND THIS COUPLE
SAYS AFTER 44 YEARS OF MARRIAGE,
THE BEST OF TIMES IS NOW.
THERE IS GREAT STUFF AHEAD
IF YOU STAY ON THE JOB,
SO TO SPEAK.
THE BEST.
YEAH.
THIS IS THE BEST PERIOD
IN OUR LIFE.
Reporter: YES, THAT'S
HER LOVE MAP.
I LOOKED ACROSS THE ROOM,
THIS MAN ENTERED.
TALL, DARK, I TOOK ONE LOOK
AT HIM AND I SAID, "IF THAT
MAN'S NOT MARRIED, HE'S GOING
TO BE SOMEDAY AND TO ME,"
AND TWO YEARS LATER, ALMOST
TO THE DAY, WE WERE MARRIED.
Reporter: SINCE THEN THERE
HAVE BEEN TROUBLES.
ALLEN SAYS YOU'VE GOT TO EXPECT
THAT.
READ MY LIPS --
THERE'S GOING TO BE BAD TIMES
AND SOMETIMES VERY SERIOUS BAD
TIMES.
Reporter: STEVE CHEATED
ON JAYNE.
IT WAS WRONG.
I WOULD HAVE BEEN TOTALLY HURT
FOR LIFE IF, IF THE SITUATION
HAD BEEN REVERSED AND IT HAD
BEEN JAYNE THAT HAD BECOME
INVOLVED.
WE MOVED PAST ALL OF OUR BIG,
BIG PROBLEMS BY GOING AND HAVING
MARRIAGE COUNSELING, PSYCHIATRY,
THE CHURCH, GOING TO CLASSES
AT THE CHURCH, FINDING OUT
YOU'RE NOT ALONE.
IT HAS BEEN TOUGH BUT WE HAVE
PERSISTED.
WE ARE NOW APPROACHING
OUR 44th YEAR.
YES.
-- LOOK THROUGH.
Reporter: ARE THERE COMMON
THREADS THAT KEEP SUCH COUPLES
TOGETHER?
WHY DO SOME RELATIONSHIPS
UNRAVEL AND WHEN THEY DO, IS
THERE SOMETHING WE CAN DO
ABOUT IT?
OKAY.
PRINT IT ALL OUT.
Reporter: JOHN GOTTMAN IS
A RESEARCHER AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF WASHINGTON, WHO PERIODICALLY
RUNS THIS AD IN NEWSPAPERS
AND THEN IN HIS LABORATORY RUNS
TESTS ON COUPLES WHO RESPOND.
HE SAYS HE CAN PREDICT WITH 90%
ACCURACY WHICH COUPLES WILL
DIVORCE.
I'M GOING TO PUT A BELLOWS
AROUND YOUR CHEST.
Reporter: OVER 25 YEARS,
HIS RESEARCH TEAM HAS OBSERVED
THOUSANDS OF COUPLES, FIRST
HITCHING THEM UP TO ELECTRODES.
YOU'D BE AMAZED, I DO
COMPREHEND.
Reporter: THEN MONITORING
THEM AS THEY TALK OR ARGUE.
I WANT TO KNOW HOW YOUR WORK
WENT AND STUFF.
I FELT LIKE YOU WERE NOT
SHARE, SO WHY SHOULD I?
Reporter: HIS TEAM WATCHES
FACIAL EXPRESSIONS, HEART RATES,
SWEAT RATES, SECOND BY SECOND.
THEY CATEGORIZE EVERY MOMENT
OF AFFECTION, ANGER,
DEFENSIVENESS.
IT'S LIKE AN X-RAY
OF THE RELATIONSHIP.
GOTTMAN SAYS FOUR KINDS
OF BEHAVIOR ARE PREDICTORS
OF DIVORCE.
HE CALLS THEM FOUR HORSEMEN
OF THE APOCALYPSE.
THE FIRST ONE IS CRITICISM, THEN
DEFENSIVENESS.
THE THIRD ONE IS CONTEMPT,
THE FOURTH WITHDRAWAL.
FOUR YEARS AGO FOR "20/20,"
WE TAPED THIS COUPLE
AS THEY WENT THOUGH THE PROGRAM.
DOUG AND THERESA DICHTMAN WERE
ASKED TO DISCUSS A FAMILY
CONFLICT.
I HAD NO IDEA DAD WAS EVEN
COMING TO TOWN OR THEY WERE
GOING TO A MARINERS GAME
OR ANYTHING, BECAUSE HE DIDN'T
TELL ME.
NOW, HE HAS A VERY CRUCIAL
DECISION TO MAKE HERE.
HOW IS HE GOING TO RESPOND
TO HER COMPLAINT?
SHE DIDN'T INSULT HIM.
SHE DIDN'T CALL HIM ANY NAMES.
SHE DIDN'T SAY HE WAS
IRRESPONSIBLE, THAT HE WAS A BAD
PERSON.
LET'S SEE HOW HE RESPONDS.
WELL, THAT'S NOT TRUE,
BECAUSE I TOLD YOU ON TUESDAY
THAT WE WERE GOING
TO THE MARINERS GAME ON MONDAY,
BUT THAT WASN'T IMPORTANT ENOUGH
FOR YOU REMEMBER, APPARENTLY.
HE'S DEFENSIVE.
HE DEFENDS HIMSELF.
DENIES RESPONSIBILITY
FOR WHATEVER HAPPENED, AND THEN
HE IS SARCASTIC.
WELL, THAT WAS PRETTY
BRILLIANT TO ASK ME WHEN I'M
IN BED, HALF ASLEEP.
Reporter: HE'S CONTEMPTUOUS
OF HER.
HE PUTS HER DOWN.
CONTEMPT IS A VERY CORROSIVE
THING IN A MARRIAGE.
IT OUGHT REALLY TO BE OUTLAWED
AND BANNED IN MARRIAGES.
Reporter: HOW MUCH
OF YOUR FOUR HORSEMEN DO YOU SEE
IN THEM?
I SEE THREE.
THREE OUT OF THE FOUR --
CRITICISM, CONTEMPT,
DEFENSIVENESS.
OH, ALL RIGHT!
[ CHEERS ]
Reporter: GOTTMAN PREDICTED
THE DICHTMANS WOULD DIVORCE,
BUT THE DICHTMANS DIDN'T BELIEVE
IT.
WILL YOU STAY MARRIED, DO
YOU THINK?
YEAH, WE'LL STAY MARRIED.
Reporter: DO YOU LOVE HIM?
YES, I LOVE HIM VERY MUCH.
[ CHEERS ]
Reporter: TWO YEARS LATER,
THE DICHTMANS DID DIVORCE.
DOUG NOW SAYS HE WISHED GOTTMAN,
INSTEAD OF MAKING NEGATIVE
PREDICTIONS, HAD ACTUALLY TRIED
TO HELP.
-- IT GOES DEEPER.
Reporter: AND NOW GOTTMAN
AND HIS WIFE, PSYCHOLOGIST
JULIE GOTTMAN, DO HELP.
TO SEE HOW, WE ARRANGED FOR THIS
COUPLE DAN AND ALLISON KNITTEL
TO GO THROUGH HIS MARRIAGE LAB.
DAN IS AN ELECTRICAL ENGINEER
IN THE NAVY, WORKING
ON SUBMARINES.
GO.
Reporter: ALLISON IS
A DISPATCHER FOR A LOCAL BUS
SYSTEM.
THEY MARRIED TWO YEARS AGO
AND ANSWERED THE AD, EVEN THOUGH
THEY DIDN'T THINK THEIR MARRIAGE
WAS IN TROUBLE.
THE KNITTELS STRUCK US AS A VERY
CLOSE COUPLE.
THEY'RE ALL OVER EACH, OTHER
MUCH OF THE TIME.
OF COURSE THEY HAVE CONFLICTS.
IN THE LAB, DAN SUGGESTS
THEY SAVE MONEY BY SELLING
THEIR HOUSE AND MOVING
INTO A TRAILER.
THEN WHEREVER OUR JOBS TAKE
US, AT LEAST WE GOT OUR HOME.
MM-HMM.
YOU KNOW, WE CAN GO THERE,
YOU KNOW, EVEN IF WE HAVE TO SIT
IN A TRAILER PARK FOR, YOU KNOW,
MONTHS UNTIL WE CAN FIND
SOMEPLACE TO LIVE.
MY BIGGEST FEAR IS THAT ONCE
WE GET INTO THAT LIFESTYLE
WE WON'T GET OUT OF IT.
Reporter: ON THE SURFACE
THERE DOESN'T SEEM TO BE MUCH
WRONG, BUT AS THE RESEARCHERS
WATCH, THEY SEE DAN
AND ALLISON'S HEART AND SWEAT
RATES STAY LOW.
THAT SUGGESTS THE FOURTH
HORSEMAN, EMOTIONAL WITHDRAWAL.
SO, WHAT DO WE DO?
Reporter: SHE LOOKS
AS IF SHE HAS CHECKED OUT.
THAT'S RIGHT.
YOU'RE PICKING THAT UP.
SHE'S SITTING BACK.
SHE'S NOT EVEN REALLY PAYING
FULL ATTENTION TO HIM.
SHE'S NOT THERE EMOTIONALLY.
IF YOU TAKE A LOOK AT WHAT'S
GOING ON UNDERNEATH, THEY'RE
REALLY SAYING, I'M OUT OF THIS
MARRIAGE.
Reporter: THE RESEARCHERS GET
MORE CLUES ABOUT THE SEEMINGLY
BLISSFUL MARRIAGE
FROM THE MARRIAGE QUESTIONNAIRE,
ON WHICH ALLISON SAID SHE THINKS
ABOUT DIVORCE OFTEN, SOMETIMES
WISHES SHE HAD NEVER MARRIED.
DAN, HOWEVER, SAYS HE'S
PERFECTLY HAPPY.
IT'S LIKE YOU ARE OUT TO LUNCH
IN THE MARRIAGE HERE.
SHE HAS ALL THESE THINGS SHE'S
UNHAPPY ABOUT AND YOU SAY, "OH,
MARRIAGE IS BLISS."
WHERE ARE YOU?
I DO --
I DO A VERY GOOD JOB OF TRYING
TO COVER MY EMOTIONS.
A SCORE OF FOUR ON THIS
DIVORCE POTENTIAL SCALE SUGGESTS
THAT IT'S VERY LIKELY THAT THIS
COUPLE WILL GET DIVORCED
EVENTUALLY.
AND SHE SCORES EIGHT.
Reporter: GOTTMAN NOW DOES
WHAT HE CALLS THE INTERVENTION.
CAN I HELP HERE
BECAUSE I REALLY THINK --
Reporter: HE ASKS ALLISON
THE EXPLAIN WHY SHE HATES
THE IDEA OF LIVING IN A TRAILER.
BASICALLY WHAT I'M SAYING
TO HER IS DON'T DISENGAGE.
TELL HIM WHAT THIS MEANS TO YOU.
THAT'S WHAT THE INTERVENTION IS.
WHAT ARE THE DREAMS BEHIND
THE CONFLICT?
Reporter: THIS TIME ALLISON
GETS TO THE ESSENCE OF IT.
I LIVED IN THE PROJECTS.
I DON'T WANT TO GO BACK TO THAT,
LIVING POOR.
I DON'T WANT TO GO BACK TO THAT.
I DON'T WANT TO HAVE TO GO
TO THE BATHROOM USING
A FLASHLIGHT.
I DID THAT.
NOW THEY'RE STARTING TO TALK
ABOUT WHAT THEY REALLY FEEL.
THE PASSION COMES BACK.
AND SOMETIMES IT'S ANGER.
Reporter: YOU'RE BRINGING UP
A LOT OF RAW STUFF, THEY COULD
START SCREAMING AT EACH OTHER.
THIS IS USEFUL?
YES.
IN THE FIRST DISCUSSION WHEN
THERE WASN'T THAT SCREAMING RAW
STUFF, WHAT WE SAW WAS VERY BIG
PREDICTORS OF DIVORCE.
Reporter: A LOUD FIGHT IS
BETTER?
A LOUD FIGHT WHERE THERE'S
NO CONTEMPT, YES.
GO AHEAD, TELL ME I'M MANIAC!
GO AHEAD, SAY ANYTHING YOU WANT,
BUT I DON'T CARE!
I DON'T CARE.
THAT'S THE WAY I FEEL!
Reporter: THE CRAMDENS, SAYS
GOTTMAN, ARE AN EXAMPLE
OF A HEALTHY COUPLE.
I LOVE YOU.
Reporter: FIGHTING AND ANGER,
HE SAYS, ARE NOT PREDICTORS
OF DIVORCE.
MARRIAGES END WITH A WHIMPER.
PEOPLE GROW APART, THEY'RE
NO LONGER FRIENDS.
THEY GET LONELY AND EVENTUALLY
THERE'S NO CONNECTION.
Reporter: GOTTMAN DOES
A SECOND INTERVENTION.
HE TELLS THEM WHAT HE SAW
AND SUGGESTS COUNSELING.
WHAT I WAS WORRIED ABOUT,
A LITTLE BIT, LISTENING
TO YOU WAS THAT MAYBE IT WAS TOO
LATE.
YOU KNOW, THAT IN A LOT OF WAYS
YOU'VE LEFT.
PARTS OF YOU HAVE GONE ALREADY.
AND YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE TO WORK
HARD TO REALLY HAVE THE COURAGE
TO COME BACK AND TRY.
Reporter: I TALKED TO THEM
TWO WEEKS LATER.
THEY SAY THINGS ARE MUCH BETTER.
DID GOTTMAN'S INTERVENTION HAVE
SOMETHING TO DO WITH CHANGING
THE WAY YOU FEEL ABOUT
THE CONFLICT?
WE WERE FORCED TO TALK
ABOUT THE STUFF THAT WE HAD BEEN
HIDING OR GLOSSING OVER.
Reporter: GONNA STAY MARRIED?
OH, YEAH.
* YOU LIKE POTATO
* YOU LIKE TO MATE OH -- *
Reporter: GOTTMAN TRIES
TO GET COUPLES TO UNDERSTAND
THAT MANY MARITAL PROBLEMS
CANNOT BE FIXED.
YOU JUST NEED TO LEARN TO LIVE
WITH THEM.
I DIDN'T GET THAT.
THAT'S BECAUSE YOU NEVER
LISTEN.
IT SEEMS LIKE THE GOAL
OF COUPLES IS IF THEY SOLVE
THEIR PROBLEMS, THEY'LL BE
HAPPY.
THE GOAL OF THERAPY OUGHT TO BE,
TO GET COUPLES TO COME TO TERMS
WITH UNRESOLVABLE ISSUES,
WITH PERPETUAL PROBLEMS THAT
THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE FOREVER.
EVERYTHING HAS TO BE
SPOTLESS.
I'M A SPOTTER.
I'M USED TO IT.
**
* AND YOU SAY -- *
Reporter: THE GOTTMANS TELL
COUPLES IT'S OKAY THAT YOU CAN'T
AGREE AND COUPLES OFTEN FIND
THAT A RELIEF.
AFTER ALL IF YOU THINK
ABOUT IT, THERE'S NO HUMAN
RELATIONSHIP THAT ANY OF US HAVE
WITH SIBLINGS OR WITH FRIENDS
THAT IS PERFECT.
INSTEAD, WE ACCEPT OUR FRIENDS
WITH NO LIMITATIONS AND THAT'S
WHAT OUR COUPLES ARE DOING
IN MARRIAGES THAT ARE WORKING
VERY WELL.
YOU ARE, INDEED, MY VERY LIFE
AND I AM BLESSED TO BE
YOUR LOVING WIFE.
WE'VE FOUND THAT THE REAL
BASIS FOR ROMANCE AND PASSION
ARE IN THESE VERY SMALL MOMENTS.
DO YOU SEE ANY MORE OF THEM?
WHEN PEOPLE EITHER
CAN TURN TOWARD ONE ANOTHER
OR TURN AWAY FROM ONE ANOTHER.
THEY'RE READING THE SUNDAY PAPER
TOGETHER.
SO WE GOT THAT ONE FINISHED.
AND WE FIND IN MARRIAGES
WHERE ROMANCE CONTINUES, PEOPLE
ARE CONNECTING IN THIS EVERY
DAY, SMALL WAY.
Reporter: JUST BE NICE
TO EACH OTHER?
RIGHT.
PEOPLE SAY, "IS THIS ALL
THERE IS TO IT?
THIS IS EASY, I CAN DO THIS."
AND WE ARE LOOKING FOR THESE
SECRETS THAT ARE REALLY VERY
EASY.
IT'S JUST THAT PEOPLE NEED TO DO
THEM OFTEN, EVERY DAY.
I THINK YOU DO LOVE ME.
I THINK SO, TOO.
[ LAUGHTER ]
ONLY 100 YEARS AGO DIVORCE
BARELY EXISTED.
IT'S NOT THAT MARRIED LIFE WAS
ANY EASIER.
IT WAS BECAUSE YOUR PARTNER
RARELY LIVED LONG ENOUGH
FOR DIVORCE TO BEEN AN ISSUE.
THE DIVORCE RATE HAS BEEN
CLIMBING, NOT JUST SINCE
THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION, IT'S BEEN
GOING UP FOR 100 YEARS.
IT MEANS TODAY'S DIVORCE PROBLEM
HAS GROWN OUT OF GOOD THINGS,
AFFLUENCE AND FREEDOM.
IT'S A LUXURY OF THE
20th CENTURY, ONE THAT'S HURT
A LOT OF PEOPLE.
THE GOOD NEWS IS THAT
THE EXPERTS SAY WE CAN MAKE LOVE
LAST.
LOVE IS NOT SOMETHING THAT JUST
HAPPENS TO US.
WE CAN HELP MAKE IT STAY.
IT DOES TAKE WORK,
BUT THE COUPLES WHO HANG
IN THERE, FIGHTING
THROUGH PROBLEMS BY TALKING
ABOUT THEM EVEN SCREAMING
ABOUT THEM, ARE MUCH MORE LIKELY
TO FIND THAT COMFORT
AND HAPPINESS A LONG
RELATIONSHIP CAN GIVE.
YOUR LOCAL NEWS.
I'M JOHN STOSSEL.
GOOD NIGHT.
**
-- Captions by VITAC --
Burbank, Pittsburgh, Tampa,
and Washington, D.C.